---
uuid: 0def3d8e-5043-4500-8e2d-1206186de64c
snippet: >
  Never cast the underlying type of an enumeration to an enumeration
  type.
tags:
  - f73854f4-b532-4b73-9053-0bb22c55edaf
  - af486755-2b5d-4f99-8a25-562dbb3eb9e5
---

Casting from the underlying integral type of an enumeration to an
enumeration type can lead an invalid enumeration value, which is a
design by contract violation. The contract for any type (including an
enumeration type) is that all instances of the type are valid members of
the type. Therefore, the mere existence of an invalid enumeration value
is a design by contract violation. Normally a cast that results in this
kind of "type contract" violation causes a compile or run time error,
but for enumerations the validity of the cast is not checked at compile
or run time.

You may cast an enumeration type to the underlying integral type (the
inverse of what this rule prohibits) since the the resulting integral
value is guaranteed to be a valid member of the underlying integral
type.

If you are casting an integral value that is known at compile time (a
constant) to an enumeration type, use the named enumeration member
instead. This ensures that if the enumeration member is assigned a new
value in the future, your assembly will function as intended when it is
recompiled. And if the enumeration member is removed in the future, your
assembly will not compile until you select a new enumeration member that
exists in the current compilation. Therefore, using a named enumeration
member instead of casting from an integral constant ensures that you
will never produce an invalid enumeration value.

If you are casting from an integral value that is not known at compile
time, then you cannot (in the general case) ensure that the result of
the cast is a valid enumeration value for every compilation of the
assembly. While direct casting to the enumeration type is forbidden by
the rule, you can use a switch statement on the integral value with case
labels for each named enumeration member you want to test for. Notice
that the case labels cast the enumeration type to the underlying
integral type, and this is not forbidden by the rule. You may use the
switch method to find an enumeration member whose value is equal to a
particular integer, but you must always handle the case where no
matching enumeration member is found.
