---
uuid: 25cc503b-19ca-428f-9839-e554d2753d58
snippet: >
  A "state space": a set of state variables which partially describe a
  set of states.
tags:
  - 33623a95-ab93-4db4-a4f2-3164018777e3
---

## Example

Consider the following C# program:

{% highlight csharp %}
struct Program
{

  static void Main(string[] args)
  {

    int x = 3;
    int y = args.Length;
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

For this program, we can define a state space *A* which contains two {%
include rule-link.html uuid="65538174-a58e-425e-882c-9ddfaeb91cd8"
text="state variables" %}: *x* and *y*. For example, some of the states
described by state space *A* include (expressed as ordered pairs):

〈*x* = -1, *y* = 356〉<br />
〈*x* = 12, *y* = 18〉<br />
〈*x* = 46, *y* = 0〉

Notice that each state is a combination of possible values of the state
variables *x* and *y*. To list all states described by the state space,
we would have to list every possible combination of values of *x* and
*y*.

Notice also that in the program *x* always equals 3 no matter what, so
the only states that are reachable are those states where *x* = 3.
Therefore, the reachable states are a subset of the states described by
the state space.

## Partially described states

The state 〈*x* = 3, *y* = 12〉 is only a partial description of the
state of the program. It says nothing about the contents of the strings
contained in the *args* array. To get a more descriptive state space, we
must add more state variables.

Consider a new state space *B* which contains three state variables:
*x*, *y*, and *args[0]*. Here we have added a new state variable
*args[0]*, representing the first string in the *args* array.

An example of the states described by state space *B* include:

〈*x* = -1, *y* = 356, *args[0]* = "hello"〉<br />
〈*x* = 12, *y* = 18, *args[0]* = "goodbye"〉<br />
〈*x* = 46, *y* = 0, *args[0]* = "abc"〉

This is more descriptive than state space *A*, but it still does not
tell us everything about the state. We also need to know *args\[1\]*,
*args\[2\]*, et cetera.

## We cannot completely describe the state

The number of possible state variables is infinite.

Consider further state variables that could affect our program:

- Available memory.
- CPU temperature.
- Power supply stability.

In fact, everything is a possible state variable, including the location
of objects in the physical world. Consider software controlling a robot.
If the command `move_forward_70_meters()` executes while there is a wall
in front of the robot, then the presence of the wall affects the outcome
of the execution.

No matter how many state variables we add to our state space, there are
still more state variables which we have not considered. Therefore, we
can never completely describe the state.

## Projections to other state spaces

Consider the following states described by state space *B*:

〈*x* = 3, *y* = 12, *args[0]* = "hello"〉<br />
〈*x* = 3, *y* = 12, *args[0]* = "goodbye"〉<br />
〈*x* = 3, *y* = 12, *args[0]* = "abc"〉

If we [project][5] these states onto state space *A*, they appear as a
single state:

〈*x* = 3, *y* = 12〉

What appears to be a single state when described in state space *A* is
actually an infinite number of states when described in state space *B*.

This is the case for any state space *X*, since there is always a larger
state space that encompasses *X*.

## Mathematical summary

A state space is a set of state variables. For example, the state spaces
in the example above are defined as (using [set notation][4]):

*A* = {*x*, *y*}<br />
*B* = {*x*, *y*, *args[0]*}

Each state variable is the set of possible values for that variable ({%
include rule-link.html uuid="65538174-a58e-425e-882c-9ddfaeb91cd8" %}).
For example:

*x* = {... , -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, ...}<br />
*y* = {... , -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, ...}<br />
*args[0]* = {... , "hello", "goodbye", "abc", "x", ...}

The set of states described by a state space is the [cartesian
product][2] of its member state variables. This is denoted by *St*(*X*)
(read "the states of *X*") where *X* is a state space:

*St*(*A*) = *x* × *y*<br />
*St*(*B*) = *x* × *y* × *args[0]*

A state is a [tuple][3] which is a member of the states of a state
space:

〈-1, 356〉∈ *St*(*A*)<br />
〈-1, 356, "xyz"〉∈ *St*(*B*)

Notice that the members of the state space itself are state variables,
not states.

*x* ∈ *A*<br />
¬(〈-1, 356〉∈ *A*)


This is different from the [common definition of state space][1].

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_space
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartesian_product
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuple
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_notation
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_projection
