---
uuid: 358fcc84-b635-4d41-a78a-24910546f979
snippet: >
  "specification" (mathematical definition)
tags:
  - ecbd0f2f-1595-478f-a011-64a4f66e6e22
---

The specification `r ∈ Spec` of a software unit `sw ∈ Sw` is a function
from the set of all states `St` to the set of all behaviors `Bh`.

A correct software unit with a specification `r ∈ Spec` will satisfy
behavior `r(s)` when executed from a state `s ∈ St`, provided its
external concerns are satisfied.

## Construction

Consider the set of all behaviors `Bh`. Elements of `Bh` include:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">Elements of Bh</th>
    </tr>
    <tr><td>Terminate in a state <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = y + 8 }</code></td></tr>
    <tr><td>Log the user in</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Throw an exception</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Do nothing and terminate</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Block the current thread until a state <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = y + 8 }</code> occurs</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Loop forever</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Shut down the computer</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Corrupt the operating system</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Move the car into the right lane</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Move the Mars rover forward 1 meter</td></tr>
    <tr><td>Put the missile on an intercept trajectory</td></tr>
    <tr><td>...</td></tr>
  </table>
</div>

*Aside: `x'` denotes the value of variable `x` after the software unit
executes. `y` denotes the value of variable `y` before the software unit
executes.*

The set of all states `St` is defined in {% include rule-link.html
uuid="d1e86266-6e71-4e28-94b8-c39142f5b4a9" %}.

The set of all specifications `Spec` is the set of all functions from
`St` to `Bh`. `Spec` is a subset of the cartesian product of `St` and
`Bh`:

<pre>
Spec ⊂ St × Bh
</pre>

A specification `r` is an element of `Spec`.

## Expressing specifications

Specifications are typically expressed as a table with two columns:
state and behavior. For example, this specification describes a software
unit that sets an integer `y` equal to the square of an integer `x`:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (x ∈ ℤ) ∧ (y ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | y' = x * x }</code></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

Note that {% include rule-link.html
uuid="d1e86266-6e71-4e28-94b8-c39142f5b4a9" section="expressing-states"
text="states are specified as a set of states using set builder
notation" %}.

Note also that the behavior condition specifies an infinite set of
behaviors. For example, all of the following software units obey this
specification, yet they all have different behaviors:

{% highlight csharp %}
// Software unit 1
y = x * x;

// Software unit 2
y = x * x;
x = 0;

// Software unit 3
Sleep(10000); // Sleep for 10 seconds
y = x * x;

// Software unit 4
move_the_mars_rover_forward_1_meter();
y = x * x;
{% endhighlight %}

*Aside: There are additional implicit constraints on correct
implementation behaviors. These are expressed in other rules.*

## Partial specifications

A specification may be a partial function from `St` to `Bh`. Consider
the following partial specification:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (t = true) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = 5 }</code></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

If `values(t) = { true, false }`, then any state in `{ s ∈ St | t =
false }` is outside of the domain of the specification. The
specification does not define a behavior for these states.

*Aside: `values` is a function defined in {% include rule-link.html
uuid="d1e86266-6e71-4e28-94b8-c39142f5b4a9" section="construction" %}.*

## Total specifications

A specification may be a total function from `St` to `Bh`. Consider the
following total specification:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (t = true) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = 5 }</code></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (t = false) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = 0 }</code></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

If `values(t) = { true, false }` and `values(x) = ℤ`, then every state
in `St` is within the domain of the specification.

## Inconsistent specifications

An inconsistent specification is a relation from `St` to `Bh` which is
not a function.

*Aside: Technically, "inconsistent specification" is an abuse of the
language; an inconsistent specification is not a specification at all!
Specifications are members of `Spec`, and members of `Spec` are always
functions.*

Consider the following inconsistent specification:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (t = true) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = 5 }</code></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (t = true) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = 0 }</code></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

The specification defines two incompatible behaviors for `{ s ∈ St | (t
= true) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }`. The conjunction of the two behaviors results in a
contradiction, so they cannot be accomplished by the same execution of
the software unit. Therefore, the specification is not a function, and
it is not a member of `Spec`.

Note that the following specification is consistent:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (t = true) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = 5 }</code></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' > 0 }</code></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

The specification defines two behaviors for `{ s ∈ St | (t = true) ∧ (x
∈ ℤ) }`. However, the two behaviors are compatible. In other words, the
conjunction of the two behaviors does not result in a contradiction, so
they actually represent a single behavior. Therefore the specification
is a function, and it is a member of `Spec`.

An equivalent specification, expressed more clearly with disjoint sets
of states, is:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (t = true) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' = 5 }</code></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><code>{ s ∈ St | (t = false) ∧ (x ∈ ℤ) }</code></td>
      <td>Terminates in <code>{ s ∈ St | x' > 0 }</code></td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

## Checking consistency

A written specification is consistent when the specification it
represents is a function from `St` to `Bh`. How do we check that this is
the case?

The format of a written specification `wr` is a relation from `ℙ(St)` to
`ℙ(Bh)`, where `ℙ(X)` denotes the power set of `X`.

A written specification `wr` is consistent when:

<pre>
∀〈a, b〉,〈c, d〉∈ wr ((a ∩ c = ∅) ∨ (b ⊃ d) ∨ (d ⊃ b))
</pre>

## To do

- Add external links

# Old content

## Behaviors as predicates

In the specification above, "terminates with y = 3" represents an
infinite number of possible behaviors. For example, all of the following
code units terminate with *y* = *3*:

{% highlight csharp %}
// Code unit 1
y = 3;

// Code unit 2
Sleep(10000); // Sleep for 10 seconds
y = 3;

// Code unit 3
t = false; // Set t
z = y - 1000; // Set z
y = 3;

// Code unit 4
InitiateBankAccountTransfer();
y = 3;

/* et cetera... */
{% endhighlight %}

Of course, it is impossible for us to specify every detail of a
behavior. So we list the predicate "terminates with y = 3" as a
constraint on the allowed behaviors, with the understanding that it is
shorthand for the set of all behaviors where "terminates with y = 3" is
true. In set notation:

<pre>
{b ∈ B | terminates(b) ∧ y = 3}
</pre>

*(There are additional, implicit constraints on behaviors defined in
specifications. These are given in other rules.)*

## Total specifications

A total specification is a specification that defines the code unit's
behavior for all possible initial states.

For example, if *t* is a boolean variable, then this is a total
specification:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">Initial State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>t = false</td>
      <td>terminates with y = 0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>t = true</td>
      <td>terminates with y = 3</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

For any state we invent, *t* is either going to be true or false, since
those are the only two values the boolean variable *t* can have.

Even if we do not explicitly list *t* in our state predicate, *t* still
has either a true or false value in our state. For example, consider the
state predicate:

<pre>
z = 82
</pre>

There are an infinite number of possible states which satisfy this
predicate:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">State</th>
      <th class="left">z = 82</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(z = 82) ∧ (t = false)</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(z = 82) ∧ (y = 37) ∧ (t = true)</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(z = 82) ∧ (y = 705) ∧ (t = false)</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(z = 82) ∧ (system_has_available_memory) ∧ (t = false)</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(z = 82) ∧ ¬(system_has_available_memory) ∧ (t = false)</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(z = 82) ∧ (y = 37) ∧ (the_sky_is_blue) ∧ (t = true)</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(z = 82) ∧ (y = 37) ∧ (the_sky_is_red) ∧ (t = false)</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(z = 82) ∧ ...</td>
      <td>yes</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

Notice that in each state, *t* has a value, regardless of whether or not
we choose to include the value of *t* in our description of the state.

Just because the state predicate says nothing about the value of *t*, it
does not mean *t* has no value in states which satisfy the predicate.
Similarly, the state predicate *z* = 82 says nothing about the color of
the sky, but this does not mean the sky has no color.

## Partial specifications

A partial specification is a specification that leaves the behavior
undefined for some set of initial states.

For example, if *x* is an integer variable, then this is a partial
specification:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">Initial State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(0 ≤ x) ∧ (x ≤ 5)</td>
      <td>terminates with y = 0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>7 ≤ x</td>
      <td>terminates with y = 3</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

The specification does not define a behavior for initial states where
(*x* < 0) ∨ (*x* = 6). States which satisfy this predicate are outside
of the specification domain.

## Inconsistent specifications

An inconsistent specification is a specification that defines more than
one behavior for a given initial state.

For example, if *x* is an integer variable, then this is an inconsistent
specification:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">Initial State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(0 ≤ x) ∧ (x ≤ 5)</td>
      <td>terminates with y = 0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>5 ≤ x</td>
      <td>terminates with y = 3</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

In states where *x* = 5, the specification defines two behaviors: one
where *y* = 0, and one where *y* = 3. Of course, *y* cannot equal both 0
and 3.

Inconsistent specifications can be harder to spot when more than one
variable is involved. Consider the following specification, where *t* is
a boolean variable and *x* is an integer variable:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">Initial State</th>
      <th class="left">Behavior</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>(0 ≤ x) ∧ (x ≤ 5)</td>
      <td>terminates with y = 0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>t = false</td>
      <td>terminates with y = 3</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

The specification defines two behaviors for any initial state which
satisfies the predicate (0 ≤ *x*) ∧ (*x* ≤ 5) ∧ (*t* = false).

Mathematically, for a specification which maps state predicates *P* and
*Q* to different behaviors, the following must be true for the
specification to be consistent:

<pre>
{s ∈ St | P(s)} ∩ {t ∈ St | Q(t)} = ∅
</pre>

## TODO

- Add external links.
