---
uuid: 3c2010e2-5c44-42ba-80f8-02c7b8f6fa98
snippet: Do not handle precondition violations.
tags:
  - 33623a95-ab93-4db4-a4f2-3164018777e3
---

In [design by contract][1], it is the client's responsibility to ensure
the [precondition][2]. If the supplier handles precondition violations,
then the supplier is checking the work of the client. This is redundant
since the client has already ensured the precondition. We must remove
this redundancy. The supplier must rely entirely on the client to ensure
the precondition. This frees the supplier code to focus on its value
added.

## Defensive programming

Consider the alternative: the supplier must handle precondition
violations. This is called [defensive programming][3].

With defensive programming,  every supplier must check for and handle an
undefined number of precondition violations, leading to redunancy at
every point in the call stack.

In some suppliers, the number of possible precondition violations cannot
be determined statically. Therefore, it is impossible to guarantee the
proper operation of these suppliers if we don't rely on the client to
ensure the precondition.

## Undefined behavior

What does "do not handle" mean in this rule?

In practical terms, it means the source code of the supplier must
consider a precondition violation to be completely impossible. Any code
branches which will only run on precondition violation are considered
unreachable code, and must be removed. Throwing an exception on
precondition violation is not allowed.

For example:

{% highlight csharp %}
public void DoSomeAction()
{

  if (/* Precondition is satisfied */)
  {

    /* Do some action... */
  }
  else
  {

    // This 'else' branch will only run on precondition violations.
    // Therefore, this 'else' branch is unreachable. It must be removed
    // from the source code.

    throw new Exception("Precondition violation."); // Unreachable code
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

In theoretical terms, the behavior of a supplier must be "undefined"
when a precondition is violated. The supplier may:

- Throw an unrelated exception.
- Return normally with an incorrect result.
- Return normally with a corrupted state.
- Loop forever.
- And more!

But we don't specify which of those things will happen. Indeed we may
not be able to determine which of those things will happen. Therefore,
we say the behavior is "undefined", and we leave precondition violations
completely unaccounted for in the source code.

*Note: Throwing an exception on precondition violation is not an
"undefined" behavior, it is a "defined" behavior.*

## Work arounds

### Weaken the precondition

If you must handle a situation that violates the precondition:

1. Alter the precondition so the situation is no longer a violation of
   the precondition.
2. Define what the supplier does in the situation.

## Exceptions

### Precondition checking in "debug" builds

Diagnostic (or "debug") builds may check the precondition to expose
errors in client code during development. Precondition checking must be
disabled in production (or "release") builds.

This practice is described in [this Wikipedia article][4].

[1]: https://www.eiffel.org/doc/glossary/Glossary#Design_by_Contract
[2]: https://www.eiffel.org/doc/glossary/Glossary#Precondition
[3]: https://www.eiffel.org/doc/glossary/Glossary#Defensive_programming
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_by_contract#Performance_implications
