---
uuid: d1e86266-6e71-4e28-94b8-c39142f5b4a9
snippet: >
  "state" (mathematical definition)
tags:
  - 6fc1011b-4e81-4d8d-aaa1-8ef67b90f27d
  - 475a05b6-2880-46d1-ae6c-787bccc406f1
  - 21b3b1f1-db5b-4591-91a7-5cfad432be71
---

A state `s` is an [n-tuple][tuple] which is an element of the [set][set]
of all states `St`.

## Projections

We can recover the value of a variable `v ∈ Var` from a state `s ∈ St`
using a projection `v(s)`. In situations with only one state `s`, we
typically write `v = 3` instead of the equivalent `v(s) = 3`. In
situations with two or more states, say `s` and `s'`, we use the
projection notation to distinguish the value of `v` in the two states.
For example: `v(s) = 3 ∧ v(s') = 4` when `v = 3` in state `s`, and `v =
4` in state `s'`.

TODO: Add external links.

## Construction

Consider the set of all variables `Var`. Elements of `Var` include:

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="2" class="left">Elements of Var</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th class="left">Symbol</th>
      <th class="left">Description</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="center"><em>x</em></td>
      <td>The variable <em>x</em></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="center"><em>s<sub>i</sub></em></td>
      <td>The stack pointer of running program <em>i</em></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="center"><em>m<sub>i</sub></em></td>
      <td>The available memory of operating system <em>i</em></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="center"><em>t<sub>i</sub></em></td>
      <td>The temperature of CPU <em>i</em></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="center"><em>p<sub>i</sub></em></td>
      <td>The position of airplane <em>i</em></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="center"><em>w<sub>chicago</sub></em></td>
      <td>The current weather conditions in Chicago, IL</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="center"><em>wf<sub>chicago</sub></em></td>
      <td>The weather forecast for Chicago, IL</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="center"><em>h<sub>i,whitney</sub></em></td>
      <td>The height of Mount Whitney at time <em>i</em></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>...</td>
      <td>...</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

*Aside: Some of these variables seem irrelevant to software. However,
this is not the case. Every variable is
[significant](#significant-variables) to some software unit, and all
variables are [relevant](#relevant-variables) to every software unit.*

Note that `Var` is an infinite set.

The `values` [function][function] is a [total function][total function]
which maps each variable `v ∈ Var` to the set of possible values of `v`.
For example, if `x` is a boolean variable in a program, then `values(x)
= { true, false }`.

The set of all states `St` is the [cartesian product][cartesian product]
of the values of all variables in `Var`:

<pre>
St = values(x) × values(s<sub>i</sub>) × values(m<sub>i</sub>) × ...
</pre>

A state is an n-tuple (where n is the [cardinality][cardinality] of
`Var`, which is infinite) which is an element of `St`.

## Expressing states

Since a state is an n-tuple where n is infinite, we cannot explicitly
denote a state with a finite number of characters. If we attempted to
explicitly denote a state, it would look like:

<pre>
〈 x = false, s<sub>i</sub> = 0x0ea8, m<sub>i</sub> = 2.35 GiB, ... 〉
</pre>

Instead, we use [set builder notation][set builder] to denote
[subsets][subset] of `St`. For example, the set of all states where `x =
false` is denoted by:

<pre>
{ s ∈ St | x = false }
</pre>

Every subset of `St` expressed in set builder notation is infinite,
since we cannot hope to constrain every variable in `Var`. The only
exception is the [empty set][empty set] `∅`, which results when we use a
[predicate][predicate] that is always false. For example:

<pre>
{ s ∈ St | (x = false) ∧ (x = true) } = ∅
</pre>

## Significant variables

A variable is significant to a software unit if the software unit could
potentially use the variable to improve its quality of service. The
relative significance of variables is subjective.

A `significance` function is a total function from `Var × Sw` to `{ x ∈
ℝ | x > 0 }`, where `Sw` is the set of all software units:

<pre>
significance ∈ (Var × Sw) × { x ∈ ℝ | x > 0 }
</pre>

For example, the variables *p<sub>i</sub>*, *w<sub>chicago</sub>*,
*wf<sub>chicago</sub>*, and *h<sub>i,whitney</sub>* are more significant
to air traffic control software than they are to video encoding
software.

The variable *p<sub>i</sub>* is a property of the physical world, a
variable which software cannot directly access. However, software can
directly access an abstract representation of *p<sub>i</sub>*, and we
can use sensors to update the abstract representation of
*p<sub>i</sub>*. If our *p<sub>i</sub>* sensor is faulty, the abstract
representation available to our software may differ from the actual
value of *p<sub>i</sub>*.

The software designer decides which variables are significant enough to
include in the software. A software designer would not even consider
creating air traffic control software without access to *p<sub>i</sub>*;
the quality of service provided by the air traffic control software
would be terrible without *p<sub>i</sub>*. However, the variable
*h<sub>i,whitney</sub>* is arguably less significant, and a designer may
choose to ignore *h<sub>i,whitney</sub>* for simplistic air traffic
control software.

Every variable `v ∈ Var` is significant to some software unit `sw ∈ Sw`:

<pre>
∀x ∈ ℝ, v ∈ Var (∃sw significance(v, sw) > x)
</pre>

## Relevant variables

A variable is relevant to a software unit in a particular state if it
can affect the behavior of the software unit in that state.

More precisely: a variable `v ∈ Var` is relevant to a software unit `sw
∈ Sw` in a state `s ∈ St` if there exists an alternative state `s' ∈
St`, where `s'` differs from `s` only in the value of `v`, which would
result in a different behavior for `sw`.

`relevant` is a total function from `Var × St × Sw` to `𝔹`:

<pre>
relevant ∈ (Var × St × Sw) × 𝔹
</pre>

For example, if you are using video encoding software on your home
computer in Chicago, IL, then an alternative state `s'` with a new value
of *h<sub>i,whitney</sub>* will never alter the behavior of your video
encoding software. In this state, *h<sub>i,whitney</sub>* is not
relevant to the video encoding software.

However, if you are in an airplane flying over Mount Whitney, then an
alternative state `s'` with a higher value of *h<sub>i,whitney</sub>*
can affect the behavior of your video encoding software if your airplane
is about to crash into Mount Whitney and destroy the hardware that the
video encoding software is running on. In this state,
*h<sub>i,whitney</sub>* is relevant to the video encoding software.

For every variable `v ∈ Var` and every software unit `sw ∈ Sw`, there
exists a state `s ∈ St` in which `relevant(v, s, sw)`:

<pre>
∀v,sw ∃s relevant(v, s, sw)
</pre>

[cardinality]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardinality
[cartesian product]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartesian_product
[empty set]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empty_set
[function]: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Function.html
[predicate]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Predicate_(mathematical_logic)
[set]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_(mathematics)
[set builder]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set-builder_notation
[subset]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subset
[total function]: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/TotalFunction.html
[tuple]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuple
