---
uuid: e1023324-1686-4c0a-a2b8-dc8d3360ae9e
snippet: Always define a behavior for every valid precondition.
tags: 
  - 6fc1011b-4e81-4d8d-aaa1-8ef67b90f27d
---

A [supplier][1] must define a behavior (or [postcondition][2]) for every
valid precondition. In cases where a supplier can perform its duties
successfully, the behavior is (typcially) to return normally with the
correct postcondition. However, a supplier must also define what happens
when the precondition is met, but it is not able to perform its duties
for some other reason.

A supplier that violates the rule does not give it's client enough
information to effectively use the supplier.

The rule complements {% include rule-link.html
uuid="3c2010e2-5c44-42ba-80f8-02c7b8f6fa98" %}

## Preconditions do not guarantee success

Just because the client satisfies the precondition, it does not
necessarily mean the supplier will return successfully.

Consider a matrix algebra API:

{% highlight csharp %}
public class MatrixAlgebra
{

  // The inverse of a matrix.
  public static Matrix Inverse(Matrix m) { /* ... */ }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Let's assume the precondition of `Matrix.Inverse` is *"`m` is a valid
`Matrix`"*. The rule states that `Matrix.Inverse` must have a defined
behavior for every valid precondition. In other words `Matrix.Inverse`
must have a defined behavior for every valid `Matrix m`, even if `m` is
not invertible.

Let's define the behavior when `m` is invertible as: *"Return the
inverse of `m`"*. This is a typical behavior for success.

Let's define the behavior when `m` is not invertible as: *"Throw an
exception"*. This is a typical behavior for failure.

In the case where `m` is not invertible, the client has satisfied the
precondition (*"`m` is a valid `Matrix`"*), but the supplier threw an
exception. This is not against the rule. The rule only says that the
behavior must be *defined*. *"Throw an exception"* is a defined
behavior.

## Other defined behaviors

Other defined behaviors include:

- Set a `Status` property on the supplier to indicate the status of the
  last operation.
- Do nothing on failure (fail silently).
- Loop forever.
- Crash the system.
- And more!

The point is that the rule only says the behavior must be *defined*.
Compare with the discussion of undefined behaviors in {% include
rule-link.html uuid="3c2010e2-5c44-42ba-80f8-02c7b8f6fa98" %}.

Furthermore, an abnormal return when the precondition is met is
perfectly valid.

Consider a token validator:

{% highlight csharp %}
public class TokenValidator
{

  // Throws exception if Token is invalid.
  public void Validate(Token t) { /* ... */ }
}
{% endhighlight %}

In this case, *"Throw an exception"* is a success behavior.

## Work arounds

### Strengthen the precondition

If you don't want to handle a certain situation in a supplier, alter the
precondition to preclude that situation.

Note that you cannot strengthen the precondition if existing clients
depend on the supplier handling that situation. In this case, refactor
existing clients to ensure the situation will not arise, or create a new
supplier and mark the old one as deprecated.

Make sure your strengthened precondition adheres to {% include
rule-link.html uuid="4905c4e9-72cb-4241-9c85-29cc2485e249" %}.

[1]: https://www.eiffel.org/doc/glossary/Glossary#Supplier
[2]: https://www.eiffel.org/doc/glossary/Glossary#Postcondition
